---
layout: page 
title: Training Acoustic Models On long Audio Files
---

## Abstract

The current implementation of SphinxTrain processes audio files of up to 5 
minutes approximately. The limitation is due to the memory amount and the 
computer time available. Possibility of training on long audio files such as 
audio books and radio broadcasts without the need for prior segmentation could 
radically simplify the training process while also making it much more 
efficient.

Current graphical hardware allows achieving computational power unavailable for 
general-purpose processors. The aim of this project is to enable the acoustic 
model training on long audio files by the utilization of NVIDIA CUDA 
architecture. With the usage of GPGPU *(general-purpose computing on graphics 
processing units)*, the memory becomes the constraint rather than the amount of 
computation. The implementation will therefore incorporate the technique to 
reduce the memory requirements of Baum-Welch algorithm.

## CUDA

CUDA *(Compute Unified Device Architecture)* [1] is NVIDIA's parallel computing 
architecture and development platform. CUDA represents a SIMD *(single 
instruction, multiple data)* execution model, which means that multiple 
processing elements perform the same operation on multiple data simultaneously.

CUDA technology is quite universal, however for the parallel hardware to be 
properly utilized, CUDA puts some restrictions on the programmer. This includes 
the absence of recursion, need for memory coalescence and avoidance of thread 
branching. Some of these limitations have smaller impact on performance on the 
latest CUDA hardware.

HMM *(Hidden Markov Model*) training algorithms - forward algorithm, Viterbi 
algorithm and Baum-Welch algorithm - are examples of the dynamic programming 
approach. It has been shown that they scale to CUDA very naturally with the 
forward and B-W algorithms speedup of 800x and 200x respectively. [2] Moreover, 
CUDA offers further optimizations which were not used in the study, such as use 
of texture memory. The optimization of HMM training algorithms will be one of 
the main tasks of this projects.

## Memory Optimizations

The desire for training on long audio files brings the need for memory 
optimizations. There are techniques that reduce the space complexity of HMM 
training algorithms from O(T) to O(sqrt(T)) with respect to length of the data 
sequence. In [3] such a technique using "checkpoints" is discussed. While 
bringing some (10%) slowdown for small inputs and HMM sizes, it is shown also 
to bring a huge speedup for large inputs causing excessive paging when using 
standard method. Implementation of this kind of optimization will be part of 
the task.


## Project Schedule

 1.  Implementation of SphinxTrain speedup and memory optimizations

    * implement reduced memory HMM training and classification algorithms
 2.  Porting SphinxTrain algorithms to CUDA

    * port the forward algorithm to CUDA
    * port the Viterbi algorithm to CUDA
    * port the Baum-Welch algorithm to CUDA
    * evaluate the resulting speedup and memory requirements
 3.  Enable SphinxTrain to process long input audio files

    * modify training scripts to handle long input audio files
    * modify feature extraction to use text alignment markup
    * modify training database format

## Related Sources


*  [1] http://developer.nvidia.com/what-cuda

*  [2] http://liuchuan.org/pub/cuHMM.pdf

*  [3] http://www.cse.ucsc.edu/research/compbio/papers/samspace.pdf

## Work Update

A collection of audio files 5 to 10 minutes long have been turned into 
CMUSphinx training database (//'rita'//) in order to determine possible issues 
when training on longer recordings. A branch **long-audio-training** was 
created in CMUSphinx SVN repository.

### Memory Size Limits

First finding was that the current version of SphinxTrain does not take long 
transcription sentences into account. The training process failed at the 
baum-welch step due to unsuccessful word lookup in lexicon. This was caused by 
sentence and the word truncation at an arbitrary limit of 8192 characters. 
First change commited was the fix for the sentence-length problem. As the 
source of limitations was identified the *read_line* function. The modification 
got rid of the *read_line* function making use of the *lineiter_** set of 
functions from *sphinxbase*. *lineiter_** interface was modified to provide 
original *read_line* functions such as comments skipping and whitespace 
trimming.

### Memory Requirements

Another result of the experiments is that the training process is rather memory 
demanding. Presently, the training consumes about 1.7GB of RAM when processing 
~5 minutes-long recording and over 4GB of RAM when processing ~10 minutes-long 
recording. The memory management of the current SphinxTrain version was 
thoroughly examined by the Valgrind family tools.

An interesting result was that the training on 42 minutes of short audio files 
(each few seconds long) took about the same as training on a single file 5:31 
minutes long. This suggests that the memory demands of the SphinxTrain is 
no-way linear to T and shows the necessity of identification of existing issues 
and implementation of memory optimization techniques.

During the experiments also the problem with extensive reallocation was found. 
This was cca 760,000 of *__ckd_realloc__* function calls in one-pass Baum-Welch 
training on an4 database. Initial active state set allocation size was 
repeatedly set too low and after that vastly insreased (by about 1.3 GB on 
*rita* database) by the step of a few bytes. The solution was to increase the 
allocated space by a quadratic step instead of linear.The modification reduced 
the reallocation to the 18,500 function calls on an4 database, thus by the 
factor of about 40. The tradeof was slight increase in the total amount of 
memory allocated from 5.7 MB to 6.2 MB and from 1.4 GB to 1.7 GB on *an4* and 
*rita* databases respectively. The multiplication factor was set to 2 but this 
was arbitrary and can be subject to optimization. In theory this modification 
could also reduce the running time of the algorithm but significant reduce of 
time was not measured (approximately 8 minutes +- few seconds in all cases - 
*an4* & *rita* with and without the modification).

The Baum-Welch implementation was also examined for memory leaks. This has 
shown not to be a big issue. Some memory leaks were found but nothing 
significant - under 1 MB in all cases. It was concluded that the reduced space 
technique implementation is necessary.

The way of reducing the memory demands is a **checkpoint method**[3]. The most 
recently the *forward* algorithm was changed to produce the reduced *active 
alpha* matrix in addition to the original behaviour. The idea is to save alpha 
values only for certain time points. In particular this is the multiples of 
sqrt(T), although the method allows parametrisation for any integer-root of T. 
The tradeof is increase in the computation length by the same factor. Following 
steps are the modification of *backward* and *Viterbi* algorithms to be able to 
recalculate the missing values.

## Reduced Baum-Welch Implementation Summary

In the past weeks the reduced Baum-Welch computation has been implemented into 
the SphinxTrain. This is a major step on the way to enable the CMUSphinx to 
train on long audio files. A summary and discussion of the results are 
following.

### Method

The approach is essentially the same as 2-level checkpoint method described in 
[3]. In the classical implementation the Forward, Backward and Viterbi 
algorithms work with complete alpha matrix. For the optimization these 
algorithms were changed in the following way:


*  **Reduced forward** algorithm stores alpha values only for the *checkpoints* 
instead of all time frames. The segment of actual alpha values then can be 
recomputed given a checkpoint - it's first time frame. The number of checkpoint 
is derived from the segment size, which is a parameter.

*  **Local forward** method was created to recompute the values for the segment 
from a checkpoint.

*  **Backward update** process the alpha matrix from the end. It recomputes the 
segment values via the local forward when needed.

*  As **Viterbi** algorithm is embedded in the forward-pass in SphinxTrain, 
only the backtracking had to be changed. It was modified in the similar way as 
backward update.

Although the segment size and thus checkpoints count can be set arbitrarily, 
the most reasonable value for both is `sqrt(T)`, where `T` is the length of 
the observation sequence (this is with the respect to the memory demands). This 
in theory reduces the asymptotic space complexity of the three algorithms to 
the square root function of observation sequence length. In reality the savings 
are somewhat smaller, as there is a need for two matrix instances in every 
method, which processes alpha values - reduced (checkpoint) matrix and local 
(segment) matrix. This approach is also expected to slow down the training 
process approximately by the factor of 2 irrespective of the segment length, 
because every alpha value is essentially computed twice.

### Results

The modification was tested on two training databases - *An4*, representing a 
short training recordings (few seconds) and *Rita*, consisting of one long (5+ 
minutes recording). The memory consumption was measured by Unix command 
`time` with verbose (`-v`) option.

The test shows, that the Baum-Welch step is by far the most memory-intensive 
among the all training steps as defined in `scripts_pl` directory (peaks 
between the steps 20. and 55.):

![modules-an4](/data/long-training/modules-an4.png)
![modules-rita](/data/long-training/modules-rita.png)

The pictures show also the resulting improvement in the Baum-Welch memory 
demands. (The memory demands of other steps were unaffected.) Here are more 
detailed pictures:

![graf_1](/data/long-training/graf_1.png)
![graf_5](/data/long-training/graf_5.png)

They clearly show the small improvement in the training on short audio (an4) 
but a huge improvement in the training on long audio (Rita). The actual 
reduction of memory consumption on Rita is from 6.8GB to 175MB and from 2.5GB 
to 100MB approximately. The time demands increased about 2 times, which is as 
expected.

Note: The computation on long audio files kept failing due to alignment error. 
Because of that the subsequent steps were skipped (or also failed) and the 
values measured for these modules are not representative. The problem with long 
audio alignment is addressed by a separate project (see 
[longaudioalignment](longaudioalignment)).

--- //[Michal Krajňanský](michal.krajnansky@gmail.com) 2011/07/13 10:26//
