---
layout: page 
tile: The following projects use Sphinx 
---

**Know any other projects that use Sphinx? Please add them!**
## Telephony


*  [Cairo](http://www.speechforge.org/): Cairo provides an enterprise grade, 
Media Resource Control Protocol Version 2 (MRCPv2) compliant speech server 
solution utilizing sphinx 4.

*  [Asterisk plugin](http://scribblej.com/svn/): Integrates pocketsphinx into 
Asterisk.

*  [Freeswitch](http://www.freeswitch.org): Asterisk alternative.  It uses 
pocketsphinx to offer speech recognition.

*  [jvoicexml](http://jvoicexml.sourceforge.net): Free VoiceXML interpreter for 
Java with an open architecture for custom extensions.

*  [Zanzibar](http://www.spokentech.org/openivr/index.html): Zanzibar OpenIVR 
is a complete, standards based, open  source IVR.

*  [ UniMRCP](http://code.google.com/p/unimrcp/ ): open source MRCP 
implementation.

## Desktop Voice assistants


*  [ Jasper ](http://jasperproject.github.io ): Personal assistant for 
Raspberry Pi.

*  [Gnome-Voice-Control](http://live.gnome.org/GnomeVoiceControl): 
Gnome-Voice-Control is a dialogue system to control the GNOME Desktop.

*  [ perlbox](http://perlbox.sourceforge.net/ ): Provides voice solutions for 
Linux and Unix desktop control.

*  [ Mammoth](http://www.lumenvox.com ): Becoming a full blown high concurrency 
C++ Flash Streaming Server running on windows and *nix.  Uses pocketsphinx for 
speech recognition.

*  [ 
Twitterkiller](http://dingoskidneys.com/cgi-bin/hgwebdir.cgi/twitterkiller/ ) - 
TWiT podcast improver, filters advertizing

*  [ Arabisc ](http://sourceforge.net/projects/arabisc/ ) - Arabic acoustic 
model.

*  [Voicekey](http://sourceforge.net/projects/voicekey/) -- voice-controlled 
keyboard for GNU/Linux.

*  
[SpeechLion](http://brewer123.home.comcast.net/~brewer123/projects/speechlion/) 
-- Desktop control application using Sphinx4 and FreeTTS written in python.

*  [ Nightingale ](http://gitorious.org/nightingale ) - Voice Web Browser

*  [ Misterhouse](http://sourceforge.net/projects/misterhouse/ ) -- an open 
source home automation program.

*  [ Vedics ](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vedics/ ) -- Yet another 
command-and-control specifically for guys from India! Only check if you are 
Indian from the Punjab!

*  [ Babble Planet ](http://www.babbleplanet.com ) -- A serious game for 
children to learn spoken English thanks to Sphinx.

*  [ In Verbis Virtus](http://www.inverbisvirtus.com/ ) -- A fantasy first 
person game in which you cast spells using your voice.

*  [ PocketVox](https://github.com/benoitfragit/pocketVox ) -- 
Pocketsphinx-based voice control for GNOME

*  [ ILA voice assistant](https://sites.google.com/site/ilavoiceassistant/ ) -- 
ILA voice assistant

##  Mobile 

*  [ Inimesed ](http://kaljurand.github.com/Inimesed ) -- Android application 
to deal contacts.

*  [ Vague ](http://kual.knetconnect.com/vague-voice-activated-gui-for-kual) -- 
Voice extension for Kual on Kindle

## Other interesting things


*  [ rhubarb-lip-sync](https://github.com/DanielSWolf/rhubarb-lip-sync ) - lip 
sync for animation.

## Transcription


*  [ Gaupol ](http://home.gna.org/gaupol ) -- Subtitle editor

## Development


*  [ VocalKit](http://github.com/KingOfBrian/VocalKit) - Pocketsphinx wrapper 
for iPhone 

*  [SpeechCloud](http://sourceforge.net/projects/speechcloud/)--  Recognition 
toolkit for Amazon EC2 using sphinx4.

*  [ASTRA - Advanced Sphinx 
Trainer](http://www.qt-apps.org/content/show.php/ASTRA+-+Advanced+Sphinx+Trainer
?content=98611): ASTRA is a Free (under GPL v3) project manager for CMU 
Sphinx-III.

*  [ Cycling74](http://cycling74.com/2010/01/08/project35-oprecognize ) - 
sphinx4 applied for MaxMSP.

*  [ OpenInterface 
SphinxSpeech](https://forge.openinterface.org/projects/sphinxspeech/ ) - 
OpenInterface project using Sphinx.

*  https://github.com/alumae/ruby-pocketsphinx-server - HTTP server 
transcribing requests in Ruby

*  https://github.com/watsonbox/pocketsphinx-ruby - pocketsphinx Ruby bindings 
created with FFI

## Art Installations


*  [ Chatter ](http://lilwondermat.com/chatter/ ) - Two computers talk with 
Twitter

*  [ Listening Post ](http://www.deweyhagborg.com/listeningPost/ ) - Listens 
for talks in public places

## Interoperation with other engines

http://sourceforge.net/projects/srmc/ Speech Recognition Model Conversion (See 
also htk2s3conv in our sources).
